TITLE: Sequence requirements for RNA strand transfer during nidovirus discontinuous subgenomic RNA synthesis

AUTHORS: Pasternak, Alexander O.; van den Born, Erwin; Spaan, Willy J.M.; Snijder, Eric J.

JOURNAL: The EMBO Journal

DATE: 2001-12-17

CORD_UID: zjufx4fo

ABSTRACT: Nidovirus subgenomic mRNAs contain a leader sequence derived from the 5′ end of the genome fused to different sequences (‘bodies’) derived from the 3′ end. Their generation involves a unique mechanism of discontinuous subgenomic RNA synthesis that resembles copy-choice RNA recombination. During this process, the nascent RNA strand is transferred from one site in the template to another, during either plus or minus strand synthesis, to yield subgenomic RNA molecules. Central to this process are transcription-regulating sequences (TRSs), which are present at both template sites and ensure the fidelity of strand transfer. Here we present results of a comprehensive co-variation mutagenesis study of equine arteritis virus TRSs, demonstrating that discontinuous RNA synthesis depends not only on base pairing between sense leader TRS and antisense body TRS, but also on the primary sequence of the body TRS. While the leader TRS merely plays a targeting role for strand transfer, the body TRS fulfils multiple functions. The sequences of mRNA leader–body junctions of TRS mutants strongly suggested that the discontinuous step occurs during minus strand synthesis.

FULL TEXT: Nidovirus subgenomic mRNAs contain a leader sequence derived from the 5′ end of the genome fused to different sequences (‘bodies’) derived from the 3′ end. Their generation involves a unique mechanism of discontinuous subgenomic RNA synthesis that resembles copy-choice RNA recombination. During this process, the nascent RNA strand is transferred from one site in the template to another, during either plus or minus strand synthesis, to yield subgenomic RNA molecules. Central to this process are transcription-regulating sequences (TRSs), which are present at both template sites and ensure the fidelity of strand transfer. Here we present results of a comprehensive co-variation mutagenesis study of equine arteritis virus TRSs, demonstrating that discontinuous RNA synthesis depends not only on base pairing between sense leader TRS and antisense body TRS, but also on the primary sequence of the body TRS. While the leader TRS merely plays a targeting role for strand transfer, the body TRS fulfils multiple functions. The sequences of mRNA leader–body junctions of TRS mutants strongly suggested that the discontinuous step occurs during minus strand synthesis. This research contributes to the understanding of COVID-19 and its various impacts on society, healthcare, and the global economy. The findings provide valuable insights for policymakers, healthcare professionals, and researchers working on pandemic response and recovery strategies.